---
title: What's the Problem with Quantum Mechanics
date: 2021-12-15
author: psu
---

If you spend any time reading about quantum mechanics you will inevitably come across a
dozen or two books that start with a sentence that reads like this:

> Quantum mechanics is arguably the most successful physical theory in the history of
science but strangely, no one really seems to agree about how it works.

Then the book will try to explain quantum mechanics to you but generally speaking when you
get to the end you will probably also not really understand how quantum mechanics is
supposed to work.

My favorite books about quantum mechanics own up to this fact and also spend a lot of time
trying to explain exactly *why* no one seems to agree about how quantum mechanics works.
Doing this in detail, of course, takes a whole book. But, like all nerds who think they
are smarter than they are, I think the highlights can be sketched in a smaller amount of
time, like one or two blog posts.

#### The Big Picture

Quantum mechanics is arguably the most successful physical theory in the history of
science. Strangely, no one really seems to agree about how it works (see?).

As a physical theory quantum mechanics was constructed in the first couple of decades of
the 20th century, as physicists tried to explain the "motion" of atoms and electrons, and
found that the existing theories of the time failed in catastrophic ways. 

The first confusing thing about quantum mechanics is the name. Why *mechanics*? Generally
mechanics is the study of the *motion* of things. But, it turns out that the motion of
subatomic objects is not really well defined. So quantum mechanics arguably concerns itself
with other things. But the name has stuck, because names never change.

The second confusing thing about quantum mechanics is exactly why the motion of subatomic
objects is hard to pin down. So let's talk about that.

#### Experimental Prelude 1: Spectral Lines

#### Mathematical Prelude 1: The Algebraic View

came to realize that Newtonian mechanics, relativity, and
Maxwell's electromagnetism (which most books now bundle together under the umbrella term
*classical mechanics* or *classical physics*) could not explain the behaviors that they
observed in experiments involving what we now know as atoms and their constituent parts.

Historically the name "quantum *mechanics*" derives from the fact that what the early
theories were trying to do is explain the motion of atoms (really electrons and photons)
and such through space, which is what *mechanics* is about. The surprising thing about the
development of quantum mechanics is that when the final shape of the theory was finally
understood, it had more to do with linear algebra and group theory than the standard bread
and butter calculus and differential equations that classical physics is based on.

I think physicists find the algebraic view to be disconcertingly abstract. In fact, there
are even many modern books on quantum physics that stick pretty closely to the analytical
viewpoint, perhaps thinking that it's more steeped in "physics intuition". [Jim Baggot's
excellent historical
treatment](https://www.amazon.com/Quantum-Cookbook-Mathematical-Foundations-Mechanics/dp/0198827865/)
is a good example of this viewpoint.

Personally, I find the view from linear algebra to be a lot easier to understand. When I
tried to take quantum in college the first month or so was filled with a lot of mysterious
calculations providing no real insight. It wasn't until I decades later when read the
algebraic treatment of the harmonic oscillator that I realized what that professor had
been going on about. Besides, differential equations and various kinds of algebra have a
deep mathematical friendship, so it should not be that surprising that they turn up
together in the most important physical theory of our time (there I go again).

#### Experimental Prelude 2: Double Slits

#### Experimental Prelude 3: Spin Boxes

#### The Problem with Quantum Mechanics

