---
title: A Forced Break
date: 2023-02-25
author: psu
---

I had a bit of a forced break from most of the regular things I do. An amazing thing about
the world is that doing a job, and hobbies, that mostly involve sitting around and typing
at a keyboard can still open you up to severely crippling orthopedic injuries in your
hands and wrist area. I have been lucky to mostly avoid issues like this for the last 30
years (knock wood) so of course the thing that took me down for 3 months ends up being
[newborn mother's thumb](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Quervain_syndrome), which I
guess can also happen to people who use gamepads too much. But I _don't_ use gamepads too
much ... I spread the thousands of hours of 
[Fromsoft addiction](i-am-malenia-blade-of-miquella.html) over many weeks and months and
am careful to play no more than an hour or two at a time. Oh well. Who knows.

What's important is that the result was me sitting at home unable to type, cook, shower,
and lots of other stuff with my right hand. So I was really fun to be with. Here are some
thoughts on things I did instead.

### Shuffle Play

I buy too much music from (Mosaic Records)[https://www.mosaicrecords.com]. I have since
the late 80s. The result is that I have a huge number of ripped tracks from various CD
collections that they have put out over the years, but I have actually only listened to a
fraction (maybe slightly more than half) of all the tracks.

So I made a playlist of unplayed Mosaic tracks and started shuffling my way through it
while I sat in my house either rehabbing the hand or trying not to think about how
uncomfortable the hand was. 

Since November I have shuffled through about 2,500 tracks, and I have about 1,000 to go. I
have not listened to all of them deeply and seriously, but I have listened enough to know
which I like more than others. Their bread and butter has always been the classic Blue
Note and more modern material. And IMHO it still is. The more historical stuff from the
Swing period is good, but not to the same level.

One interesting side effect of this exercise is that it turned the music listening part of
my brain back on. It had been taking a bit of a vacation lately and I had not been really
motivated to engage with the huge amount of recorded music in the world. Getting this
engagement back has improved my life.

### English and World Football

Another thing I engaged in more than I have in the past is soccer, which in this section
of the page I will call football since it seems more appropriate.

The beginning of my break landed right on the beginning of the World Cup which happened in
the winter this year because it was held in a part of the world where if you played
football in the summer you would fall over dead on the field. For more on this look at
[this set of
videos](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLWYJXDKS21OFMfd-kEifYJNCnKHpEDgCq).

So anyway, the World Cup was cool, especially all the Messi brilliance, the entire world
making fun of Ronaldo, and that craaayyyyyyzy final game. But the difference this year was
that it came right in the middle of all the major English and European professional
seasons. So, after a short break the curious could dive immediately into the Premier
league rat hole. In the past I had thought about doing this, but it all seemed too
complicated. This year I literally had nothing better to do. But it's _still_ too
complicated.

The first thing you notice watching league, or "club" football, as they call it, is that
the games are very different from the World Cup. This should not be surprising. The World
Cup is a giant high pressure all star game where the happiness of entire nations depends
on good performances from teams that have played together for a comparatively short time.
So the games tend to be a bit, for lack of a better description, stiff and tight. So while
it's an incredible event the quality of the football games is a bit variable. This is me
saying what hundreds of millions of people have known for decades.

Premier League is actual teams doing their actual every day jobs, and the games are a lot
more fun to watch. Especially the opening minutes of games. The ball goes up and down and
back and forth. People run for their lives. There are early scores. Lots of trash talking
and drama. It's great.

Of course, Premier League is, in a literal sense, only the very tip of the top of the
iceberg. If you are not careful you are also signing up for the secondary leagues, FA Cup,
"League" Cup (which for sponsorship reasons is really the Carabao Cup right now),
Champions League, Europa League, and who knows what else. One could retire and do nothing
but watch English and European football 7 days a week, 10 hours a day, for the rest of
one's life. All of this is to say that my intuition that this was too complicated was
right. The FA Cup is cool though.

The best thing about all these games is how high variance they are. It
seems very rare for things to actually go the way people would expect them to, given
whatever the current league standings (er, table) are at the time. The bottom of the
league will often outplay and destroy the top. Or, some team from the third or fourth tier
league will play a team two or three tiers above it (to an exciting draw)[https://www.wrexham.com/news/wrexham-draw-sheffield-united-at-home-in-the-fa-cup-229064.html]. Exciting draws
are not a thing I would have expected to either

1. Acknowledge

or

2. Enjoy

But there you go.

Finally, to answer the obvious question: I have not picked a team yet. I'm going to
bandwagon the front runners (Arsenal, Man United) this year. And I like the Crystal Palace
shirts and team name the best. Although _Wolverhampton Wanderers_ and _Nottingham Forest_
are both strong contenders in the name contest. Oh, and I like the bubble machines at West Ham.

### Izola's

Izola's is a buffet style restaurant in Hinesville Georgia. It serves food that is best
described as "Classic American Southern". Early on in the [great
stupidity](so-youre-in-a-global-pandemic.html) they were one of my early finds on TikTok.
Every day they would pan a phone camera down the buffet while a friendly voice narrated
the menu. Typical items included, say, chicken and rice, chicken and dumplings, fried
chicken, baked chicken, panko crusted fried fish, BBQ meatballs, Swedish Meatballs,
smothered pork chops, collard greens, green beans, fried cabbage, mashed potatoes,
dressing, rice, 2 or 3 kinds of gravy, Mac and Cheese ("scoop that mac"), and so on.

During the pandemic we thought: "when this stupidity is over we should go down there".
Around the time my hand finally started feeling a bit normal we decided that while
stupidity in the world would never end, we should go down there for some warmer weather
and the food, so we did.

And it was just as glorious as in the videos.

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/52673014052/in/photostream" title="IMG_0328"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/52673014052_a414838af4_z.jpg" width="640" height="480" alt="IMG_0328"></a>

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/52674008778/in/photostream/" title="IMG_0333"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/52674008778_e148efb3e9_z.jpg" width="640" height="480" alt="IMG_0333"></a>

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/52674008848/in/photostream/" title="IMG_0339"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/52674008848_a8445208e4_z.jpg" width="640" height="480" alt="IMG_0339"></a>

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/52673013827/in/photostream/" title="IMG_0337_jpg"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/52673013827_effa837aae_z.jpg" width="640" height="480" alt="IMG_0337_jpg"></a><script async src="//embedr.flickr.com/assets/client-code.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/52673509506/in/photostream/" title="IMG_0355"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/52673509506_fc2ff7dc73_z.jpg" width="480" height="640" alt="IMG_0355"></a>

You should go. It's close to Savannah, which is also a neat place.

### Apple Voice Recognition

The voice input stuff in the Apple operating systems is just good enough to be really
annoying when it misses, and not really good enough to use on a regular basis if you can
actually type at the keyboard. Not surprisingly it's especially bad with jargon and other
domain specific language. I used it a lot when my hand was at its most useless. But now
I've mostly stopped again.

### Chili

Finally, once things improved a lot, I made chili for the Super Bowl game (and the two or
three Premier League and related games that played before it on Sunday morning and
afternoon). I an pretentiously snobby about [my chili](my-chili.html) because I make my own chili
powder and use that as a base.

This year I learned I should be using those dried peppers to make a chili pepper sludge,
and then make chili out of that. [Kenji does it here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pRsPrQ56BvI).

So I did this with most of the peppers. Then used two or three more to also make some
powder to spread around in the meat, and kept the rest of my method the same. And it was
great. I'll do it this way from now on. At some point I'll update the chili recipe page
too so people are not misled into using the previous inferior method.

That's all I got for now. It's good to be back. And I'm gonna make that chili again.

Note: whatever you do, don't use the recent [NYT chili
recipe](https://cooking.nytimes.com/recipes/1023921-chili?searchResultPosition=4). The
fact that they would call the result of that recipe "spicy" is an insult to the word
spicy.

See you next time. Oh! It's football time!
