---
title: Biscuits and Banjos
date: 2025-06-30
author: psu
---

Someone at my work first turned me on to the _Carolina Chocolate Drops_, but I didn't
quite lock in to the point of it all until we saw the group live at the 2008 Pittsburgh
Arts Festival. Live on stage you suddenly realize what is going on, and how Rhiannon
Giddens has _that voice_.

So over the years I have followed her and her music albums around and managed to see one
more live show in the year just before the pandemic. And I was just as amazed as before.

Then this year it was announced that she had organized a festival in her native North
Carolina called [Biscuits and Banjos](https://www.biscuitsandbanjos.com) which would be
filled with her music, a reunion of the Chocolate Drops, and _biscuits_ as well. I was
instantly all in.

First, the [biscuits](https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/54621951641/in/dateposted-public/) were great. You can find [the recipe
here](https://www.bbc.com/travel/article/20250509-the-flawless-biscuit-that-took-years-to-master).

Second, the music was also great. It had a greatness that only happens in live performance.

We observed the bass player Christian McBride having more cool and poise in the tip of his
little pinky finger than most musicians have in his entire body but also the generosity to
make the show more about the student musicians that he was playing with than about himself.

We saw Taj Mahal playing with a group younger musicians who were all a bit in awe, and yet
also all holding their own.

Finally, we saw a reunion of the _Chocolate Drops_ in all their forms and with many of the
other musicians that they directly inspired and influenced. It was an incredible and
joyful night. Look at it:

> <a data-flickr-embed="true"
href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/54480256396/in/dateposted-public/"
title="DSC03158-2"><img
src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/54480256396_eff6bd80b8_z.jpg" width="640"
height="427" alt="DSC03158-2"/></a>

This night was filled with so many moments like this that even my little camera and my
relatively limited live event picture taking skills was able to capture the aura and
energy of it. This is a thing that _only_ happens in live events. The best live music has
a sort of resonant energy that fills the space occupied by the performers and the audience
and makes them into one collective creature. You can't get that feeling in any other way.

So this is yet another reason you should turn off the Spotify and the Apple Music over the
Internet and go listen to musicians play in front of your face. Recorded music, at its
best, is less than half of the real experience. For me this is the most true, of course,
with classical and orchestral music. But really it's just as true in the other genres.
Especially when the shows and their sound are produced with so much skill and care.

And we got to have biscuits like this too!

> <a data-flickr-embed="true"
href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/54621078222/in/dateposted-public/"
title="IMG_8956"><img
src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/54621078222_da9edb1d19_z.jpg" width="480"
height="640" alt="IMG_8956"/></a>

> <a data-flickr-embed="true"
href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/54621951641/in/dateposted-public/"
title="IMG_9119"><img
src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/54621951641_6cee87e63d_z.jpg" width="640"
height="640" alt="IMG_9119"/></a>

> <a data-flickr-embed="true"
href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/54621078197/in/dateposted-public/"
title="IMG_9216"><img
src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/54621078197_54eec1d02f_z.jpg" width="640"
height="480" alt="IMG_9216"/></a>

> <a data-flickr-embed="true"
href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/54621078212/in/dateposted-public/"
title="IMG_9066"><img
src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/54621078212_eb31ff0eb8_z.jpg" width="640"
height="640" alt="IMG_9066"/></a>
