---
title: Cheese Ramen
date: 2023-12-31
author: psu
---

A friend of mine who went to graduate school in Pittsburgh before moving back to Singapore
once gave me a valuable piece of advice that every food tourist should take to heart. The
"Rajesh Menu Rule" is that if you are in a place and you see an item on the menu that
you've never seen before in a place of that kind, you should order it immediately. The
context for his application of this rule was Indian restaurants in the U.S. many of which
have a fairly standard menu template. Any deviation from this standard usually indicates
some true piece of creativity that the owners of the place want to point out, so it's good
to investigate.

On my first trip to [Vancouver, BC](vancouver-bc-cooler-than-seattle.html) in 2010 I sadly
did not follow this advice when getting dinner at [Kintaro
Ramen](https://www.yelp.ca/biz/kintaro-ramen-vancouver), a small ramen shop that sits in a
cluster of them in the western part of the downtown area. On that trip I spied the item
they have on their menu that you probably won't see in most other shops: "Cheese Ramen".
They even call it out as a special thing that is of their original creation. I should have
have ordered it on sight, but at the time I wanted the more straight up version of the
dish, since Pittsburgh is something of a ramen wasteland. That's fine.

What is inexplicable is that I could have gone _back_  to this shop in 2014 and _again_
neglected to try it. I had always felt low level regret about this and had always hoped to
get back to Vancouver and honor Rajesh by correctly following his advice at this place.

So this year when we decided to go back to Vancouver for an end of up-and-down year trip,
to hopefully end the up-and-down year on an up note, my mission was clear. On our fourth
night in town (there is a lot of food in this town, it took until then for a spot to clear
up in our schedule, and even then we were still semi-stuffed with dim sum lunch) we headed
back to the shop and I got my bowl. And it was good.

The bowl is based on their miso broth with slices of pork and then one shredded cheese
(maybe mild swiss, maybe mozzarella) and one slice of cheese (probably mozzarella):

> <a href="../images/IMG_5426.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5426.jpg" height=400 title="cheese ramen" alt="cheese ramen"></a>

As you eat it the cheese melts into the soup and all over the noddles. It's nice! You can
kind of see the cheese melted into the noodles and broth here:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5437.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5437.jpg" height=400 title="cheese ramen" alt="cheese ramen"></a>

Of course, the more straight up ramen at Kintaro is also still great:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5430.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5430.jpg" height=400 title="shio ramen" alt="shio ramen"></a>

And they also had a cool onigiri extra, which Karen had been craving.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5421.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5421.jpg" height=400 title="onigiri" alt="onigiri"></a>

At this point I could make the rest of this post a lightly annotated list of about 125
food pictures. But that would be pretty tedious. So I'll try and edit this down to the top
ten or fifteen highlights along with where the dishes came from.

Our main sources for food info came from a list that a colleague that the Apple office in
the city gave me that leaned heavily on the Japanese spots around Downtown, and also the food
blog [Sherman's Food Adventures](http://www.shermansfoodadventures.com) that I found out
about from a friend of my brother's who lives in town and plays hockey with Sherman.
Sherman apparently produces that web site as a "hobby", which gives you an idea of what
hobby-level eating is like in Vancouver, BC (remember: [it's cooler than
Seattle](https://mutable-states.com/vancouver-bc-cooler-than-seattle.html)).

#### Izakaya and Yakitori and So On.

If you want casual Japanese bar food look no further than two local chains: _Guu_ and
_Zukkushi_. The _Guu_ places are izakayas with a wide range of small plates. Highlights
here were the sashimi and karaage of various sorts.

Scallop sashimi was great at _Guu with Garlic_ on Robson:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5087.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5087.jpg" height=400
title="scallop sashimi" alt="scallop sashimi"></a>

The cauliflower karaage was great at _Guu Toramasa_ on Seymour street:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5838.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5838.jpg" width=400 title="cauliflower" alt="cauliflower"></a>

And that location had a great yellowtail sashimi as well:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5834.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5834.jpg" width=400
title="yellowtail sashimi" alt="yellowtail sashimi"></a>

Meanwhile, at _Zukkushi on Main_ we got dozens of different kinds of grilled skewers and
also this chicken yakitori rice bowl that was absolutely perfect in every way.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5744.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5744.jpg" width=400
title="yakitori rice bowl" alt="yakitori rice bowl"></a>

They also make an Udon Carbonara that you should try. Especially if you tried the Cheese
Ramen above and liked it.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5742.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5742.jpg" height=400
title="Carbonara Udon" alt="Carbonara Udon"></a>

We also overloaded on fried meat at _Saku_ on Robson, which has the best (and most) katsu I've
ever had. This is their sampler platter, which was a lot bigger than we thought it would
be before we ordered it. Oops.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5165.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5165.jpg" width=400
title="katsu" alt="katsu"></a>

Finally, our sushi slot was taken up by a fancy lunch at a fancy spot called _Miku_
which you should also go to if you can afford it.

Again I got a rice bowl that was perfect in every way. This is tuna on an absolutely
perfect bed of white rice.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5790.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5790.jpg" height=400
title="Tuna donburi" alt="Tuna donburi"></a>

Close up:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5803.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5803.jpg" height=400
title="Tuna donburi Udon" alt="Tuna donburi Udon"></a>

The rest of the sushi was just as good:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5791.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5791.jpg" width=400
title="sushi" alt="sushi"></a>

Somehow I have no photographic record of the inari sushi that I got, which for once in North
America was better than the stuff you get at a 7-11 in Japan. I know the _Miku_ people
would be insulted by this comparison, but they have to understand that where I am coming
from this is the highest possible compliment.

#### Dim Sum and Related

We broke with tradition and got dim sum in the city this trip instead our normal mode of
going to Richmond. I think we did OK.

_New Mandarin Seafood Restaurant_ had the only shu mai that Karen ever ate on purpose.
They had scallop and quail egg in them.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5366.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5366.jpg" width=400
title="scallop shu mai" alt="scallop shu mai"></a>

They also had these seafood tofu rollups that were similarly excellent.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5351.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5351.jpg" height=400
title="seafood tofu rolls" alt="seafood tofu rolls"></a>

And finally, the ever popular sleeping teddy bear dessert.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5340.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5340.jpg" width=400
title="teddy bear dessert" alt="teddy bear dessert"></a>

Meanwhile, we went to _Royal Palace Seafood Restaurant_ on Christmas. As one does. There
were a few people there.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5595.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5595.jpg" height=400
title="Royal Palace Seafood Restaurant" alt="Royal Palace Seafood Restaurant"></a>

Everything here was great as well. But the highlight was the last thing we ordered after
we were already full. This crab meat and assorted seafood egg fried rice was just
unhinged:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5631.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5631.jpg" height=400
title="Fried rice" alt="Fried rice"></a>

The clay pot with the steamed chicken on rice in it was also great:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5605.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5605.jpg" height=400
title="Chicken and rice clay pot" alt="Chicken and rice clay pot"></a>

We had also never had a well executed pan fried steamed buns with pork in them like these:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5608.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5608.jpg" height=400
title="Pan fried steamed buns" alt="Pan fried steamed buns"></a>

Things like this don't make it to Pittsburgh.

In between all of these things, we _did_ head to Richmond to walk around the malls and to
get the roast meat at _Hong Kong BBQ Master_. Neither was a disappointment, but
I'm only showing pictures of the roast meat.

They have two kinds of pork:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5499.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5499.jpg" height=400
title="pork and pork" alt="pork and pork"></a>

And also pork, duck, and chicken:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5502.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5502.jpg" height=400
title="pork and chicken and duck" alt="pork and chicken and duck"></a>

Finally, the fancy Chinese this time was a Michelin Starred Peking Duck place that only
has a score of 3.5 in the local Yelp. _iDen & Quanjude Beijing Duck House_ is probably not
the best value for money, but I found the the food and the service to be hard to
criticize. I can't say why the Yelp people are so mad about it.

Get the smoked fish appetizer:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5222.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5222.jpg" width=400
title="smoked fish" alt="smoked fish"></a>

And of course the duck:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5241_jpg.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5241_jpg.jpg" width=400
title="peking duck skin" alt="peking duck skin"></a>

And the special duck fried rice with crispy rice bits and foie gras:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5251.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5251.jpg" width=400
title="fried rice" alt="fried rice"></a>

#### Vij's

Of course we went back to Vij's. This experience is summed up by the vegetarian Thali.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5568.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5568.jpg" height=400
title="thali at vij's" alt="thali at vij's"></a>

#### Ahn and Chi

My brother's friend suggested that we get together and have lunch at a local favorite
Vietnamese spot, _Ahn and Chi_. This place has [a nice story behind
it](https://anhandchi.com/pages/about), and it has really good soft-shell crab fried rice.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5869.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5869.jpg" width=400
title="Crab fried rice" alt="Crab fried rice"></a>

The vermicelli bowl is also great. But we should have split one.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5874.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5874.jpg" height=400
title="vermicelli bowl at ahn and chi" alt="vermicelli bowl at ahn and chi"></a>

#### Miscellany

OK. I've about doubled my ten to fifteen highlights quota. You missed out on the chicken
buns that have ham in them at the _Kam Do_ bakery, _Hei Hei_ rice rolls in the [Richmond
Public Market](https://www.yelp.ca/biz/richmond-public-market-richmond) food court in
Richmond, _DingDing_, a Taiwanese hole in the wall with omelet covered rice, _Lee's
Donuts_, and the bagels at _Siegels_. Finally, there was the corner with at least 5 or 6
coffee shops near Hastings and Cambie. We tried _Nemisis_, _Timber Train_, and _Revolver_, but
just go to _Revolver_ because it's the best one.

> <a href="../images/IMG_5925.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5925.jpg" height=400
title="Revolver coffee" alt="Revolver coffee"></a>

I'll end with a gratuitous sunset picture:

> <a href="../images/PC220525.jpg"><img src="../images/PC220525.jpg" width=400
title="sunset over the harbor on the mountains" alt="sunset over the harbor on the mountains"></a>

A sunrise picture:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5469.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5469.jpg" width=400
title="sunrise over railroad tracks" alt="sunrise over railroad tracks"></a>

And whatever this is:

> <a href="../images/IMG_5927.jpg"><img src="../images/IMG_5927.jpg" width=400
title="caption this photo" alt="caption this photo"></a>

#### Extra Note on Photos

I like to take pictures on trips. I even still bother to pack a camera different from
phone with which to do this. I've told the story before about how I went from [giant
cameras](/too-much-camera.html) to [smaller cameras](the-camera-we-want-redux.html) and
then [back and forth](/back-and-forth.html) again.

This trip might have convinced me to go even smaller on the non-phone camera. This seems
paradoxical but it really isn't. Smaller cameras can now do what you used to need a giant
camera to do. So you might as well take advantage of that if the main motivation for your
trip is something besides maximizing photo quality (like stuffing yourself with dim sum).

You'll notice that almost all of the pictures on this page were taken with my phone (the
file names start with the standard iPhone prefix). And the ones that were not could
(mostly) have just as well been done with a high quality smaller fixed lens camera
like the Sony RX100 model whatever. So I think I'm going to go that way.
