---
title: How to Beat Malenia If You Are Not That Good
date: 2022-07-03
author: psu
---

So about a month ago I had managed to get past this fight with a solo caster, which as all
_Souls_ veterans know is the easiest way to solo anything. Even so it took a week or so of
noodling around and getting used to the rhythm of things, especially the big change up in
phase 2. She becomes much more aggressive in phase 2 and your attack windows become much
smaller.

My next goal was to try and get past the fight with minimal casting. To do this I had been
running a strength/faith build, mostly using fire damage swords and such since I could not find a
faith spell that really worked for general purpose combat.

Let's see how that went. Yeah, it was going well.

> <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/trzMjDyQID4" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Actually, this video makes it seem worse than it was. I spent a long time trying to work
out what my approach was going to be, and died a ton while doing this "research" since I
did not really practice any one approach very well. Once I picked something it took about
a week to build up enough muscle memory to get through both phases.

I saw three possibilities:

1. Parry strategy. This works great if you have the reflexes. Which I do not. More later.

1. Blasphemous Blade strategy. This takes advantage of my faith/melee build to do maximum
   burst damage because she is weak to fire. It has other issues though. And, the weapon
   skill on this weapon is a bit too ... "casty". That is, you do a lot of damage from
   distance if you have enough time to get it off. But those windows are more rare than
   with the spell caster because the wind up for the attack is too long.

1. Something else.

Let's go over these one by one.

#### Parry

Parrying Malenia has two main problems:

1. You have to learn all the moves that you can parry. There are about six which I will
   list below.

1. In a new twist Elden Ring makes you do _three_ parries for every critical against the
   major bosses. This is to combat the "Gwyn Problem" where if you learn how to parry just
   well enough the fight is trivial. Needing to constantly get three in a row means that
   you have to be so good you hardly ever miss.

The main moves that Malenia does which you can parry are:

1. The short forward dash followed by a wide swing.

1. The "sword click" followed by a forward dash followed by three fast swings.

1. The jump to _your_ left followed by a swing.

1. The jump to _your_ right followed by a swing.

1. Two immediate fast swings.

1. The jump and quick twirl in the air, followed by a swing.

I should have cut together a video showing examples of each of these and me missing. But I
forgot to do that before getting past the fight. This <a
href="https://www.reddit.com/r/Eldenring/comments/tlvg2c/some_parryfocused_tips_for_malenia_after_spending/">Reddit
thread</a> describes the moves in some more detail. And <a
href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D8fn54tcswc">this video</a> and <a
href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kzkVoVh9WPk">this video</a> show most of the moves.
But the guy hits all the parries so it doesn't help to teach you how this fails.

Of course she has other moves you can't or shouldn't parry. You can't parry the spin kick
that she uses to get into a lot of her other combos. You can't parry Waterfowl. You also
can't parry some of the new stuff she does in phase 2. I think you _can_ parry the move
where she jumps up in the air and then dashes forward and stabs you to death (<a
href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zbmAS_zichM">which she always does after you
heal</a>, because she's a cheater) but it's not worth it because the attack is so easy to
punish anyway. Finally, you don't need to parry the swing where she swoops up into the air
and then lands and asks you to please hit her.

The problem with the parry strat for _me_ is that I can only parry the first three of the
six moves above with any reliability. God knows I tried. It seems to me that you not only
need to get the timing _just right_, especially for the faster moves, you also need to get
your spacing _just right_ and your parries can fail if you are just a bit too far away, or
too close, or not perfectly lined up left to right. 

Worse, when my parry misses I don't know why, because it feels like I did it just like
before. If I could even have done five out of six I might have tried for this more because
you can then dodge to the other. The two I just could not learn were the two fast swings
and the floaty jump to the right. I could get each of them about half the time, but could
never figure out what I did wrong when I missed.

So I finally gave up.

#### Blasphemous Blade

I did the fight this way for a while, but didn't like the feel of it. Later, I also tried
dual wielding this sword and a second large sword (Claymore) with fire and doing jump attack spam. That
worked pretty well too, but I found it hard to keep the right spacing. So let's talk about
spacing in this fight.

Spacing for this fight is not an issue for the first quarter of her health bar. But, once
she is down to 60% or 70% health, she will bring out Waterfowl Dance seemingly at any time,
even in windows when you used to think you were safe doing a big attack. Like at the end
of this video:

> <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0yX7ArWnq_M?start=41" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Here she does that jump dash, which you can roll through and then punish. But _not this
time_. Joke's on me.

So, what you want for this fight is something that can poke her for damage from pretty far
away, so you can keep your spacing to escape things like Waterfowl as long as you are
careful. 

The great swords like the Blasphemous Blade and the Claymore are great, but a bit short
for this. So I went looking around for other ideas, while at the same time continuing to
noodle with this combo.

Note: I realize that if you are good you can evade a point blank Waterfowl Dance using
that spin in place and then dodge out at just the right second move ... or you can use
Bloodhound's Step, or you can switch to a shield for the first flurry and then dodge out.
All of these things will work for you if you have faster muscle memory than I do but they
don't work for me because I don't. I can only remember two or three moves at a time in a
fight like this and needing to switch up in a window even as relatively long and
telegraphed as the wind up to WFD is hopeless for me. Believe me I tried. It just never
worked.

#### Something Else

So the main other thing I tried was to use longer weapons with moderate bleed and/or frost
to get my pokes or longer jump attacks. Obviously Rivers of Blood would also have worked
here, but I'd already done that.

The real problem with this idea was that this character was a Faith/Strength build and all
the moderate bleed weapons are Dex weapons. I tried to do some moderate respecs to get
more Dex damage but ultimately didn't have the patience to try and get to a 50/50/50
Faith/Strength/Dex build ... which even if I had done it would have been the ultimate try
hard move anyway.

Still, for those of you with Dex builds who don't want to use Rivers ... try cold katanas.
These are nice because you can get two kinds of burst damage: one from the frost procs and
one from the bleed. I used an Uchi and the Nagakiba with dual wielding. Both are great.
They just did not hit hard enough with my build so the fight took too long.

I also tried the Bloody Helice for a while because I saw someone using it in a youtube
video. Again, this could have worked on a Dex build. But that's not what I had.

At this point I had to take an enforced one week vacation from this job to visit some
folks and eat Chinese food and stuff. While I was away, I found the way that I would
ultimately beat this fight, and of course it was Emarrel who showed me what to do:

> <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/imtE5OVKqQs" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This person has been showing me how to play these games better for almost a decade now,
and here they are using a giant strength-oriented sword to beat this fight.

Since I had this weapon already, I gave it a try when I got back. And after a week or so
it finally worked.

#### Success, and Why it Worked

The reason it worked is that the poke attack with the Greatsword (and all the other
colossal swords) is super overpowered. It's as fast as the katanas, faster than the
medium sized swords, has fast recovery, and hits harder and from a longer distance than
almost anything else. Finally, you can get the poke out of a roll _or_ a crouch, so it's
easy to get into as well.

So here is the setup:

1. Greatsword and 60 strength.

1. Giant Hunt ash of war, which is also a sort of forward poke and has the added bonus of
   often throwing the boss up into the air and leaving her to land in a heap. Always fun.
   Also very good damage for not much FP use.

1. Put Cold on the sword, for the occasional frostbite burst damage.

1. Various other body buffs, the strength and stamina Physick for phase 2, and the Godrick
   rune. You can save scum to not run out of rune arcs and buff items if you want.

1. Now just keep your spacing, do an R1 poke for fast attacks, and L2 poke for bigger
   hits, and take the frost bonus when you get it.

If you are better than me you can also chain a bunch of pokes and maybe a jump attack or
two to get a stagger for even more burst damage. But I'm not aggressive enough to get this
to happen that much. When I try too hard for the stagger I mostly end up out of position
and get Waterfowled to death.

Speaking of Waterfowl. If you watch the Emarrel video you will notice that you can dodge
this attack if you have almost any distance between you and Malenia when she does the
first hop up in the air. So the things to avoid are:

1. Ending up directly under her when she starts the thing.

1. Running away too slowly at the start and getting murdered by the first flurry.

Still, I have recently managed to survive this attack even being as badly out of position
as in this video:

> <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Me8CqINWi_w" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

So maybe some day I'll be able to avoid it even point blank. But I would not get my hopes
up.

What I do instead is try to keep enough distance to be able to run away from the attack
and use the long range of the sword pokes to get damage in. This is actually the hardest
thing about phase 1 of the fight. She is so passive in phase 1 that to make any progress
in the fight you have to walk about and try to hit her in the face. But if you do that you
risk being right next to her when the WFD starts.

I ended up using Lightning Spear from range to try and bait out the Waterfowl when I know it's
likely coming anyway. This works remarkably well at least once or twice per run.

Once you are pretty good at phase 1 you just have to see phase 2 enough to learn how to
parse the visual cues with all the wings and shit on the screen and get used to the much
higher level of aggression. Where in Phase 1 she does a lot of slow walking followed by
long combos, in Phase 2 she really doesn't let up at all and you have to get a tactical
poke in here and there to interrupt the flow of attacks. Otherwise you just lose control
and die. Like here:

> <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/of8kZFw3w50" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

When you can put this all together, and get some good RNG, you will finally win, and it
will feel pretty good.

> <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_nBfRpdEwoI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I'm amazed that I only took one hit in that run. I wonder if I can duplicate the effort at
level 1. Check back here in six months to see how I do.

After all this time with this fight I still mostly like it. The main obvious bullshit is
the blatant input reading (<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zbmAS_zichM">dash
attacks after every heal</a>, Waterfowl whenever you over-commit and get too close) that
the boss is doing. Phase 1 is also too slow, while phase 2 is too fast. But for me these
are minor issues. It's still the most interesting fight in the game, and I would not
really mind going right back to it again right now.
