---
title: How to Ring 2024
date: 2024-09-20
author: psu
---

It's hard to believe it's been ten years since I constructed this relatively random
collection of 2000 words about Wagner's Ring:

[https://mutable-states.com/how-to-ring.html](https://mutable-states.com/how-to-ring.html)

This short note is mostly here to say that I still believe most of the random words that
are on that page, but a few things have changed in the record business since it was
written.

First, they remastered the _Solti_ box _again_. It's not clear to me there was any reason
to do that, and you can't find the last re-re-re-master from 2012 anymore which is a bit
sad since it had gotten cheap.

But cheap also doesn't matter because of the other major change in records since ten years
ago: now basically everything I wrote about on that page is on the streaming services.
Actually I guess this was almost true back then too, but streaming had not yet completely
crushed all the other alternatives to the same extent as it has now. Anyway, you can pay
one small fee for all the Ring you can eat.

But, one recording you still can't find on streaming is the [Keilberth set from
Testament](https://testament.co.uk/product-category/the-keilberth-ring-cycle/?display_mode=list)
which I will also [link to on amazon
here](https://www.amazon.com/Wagner-Ring-Nibelungen-Astrid-Varnay/dp/B000XTCBWS/) since I
bet the other link will go bad. The amazon price seems a bit high though, given that you
can get it from the label for about $140 including shipping.

I talked about this recording on my old page, and even bought the set, but did not get
around to playing through it until recently. This is the real reason I started to write
this page. I think this is probably the best of the "historical" class of recordings from
the 50s. It's in stereo. You can really hear how good the singers are. But the overall
production is still no match for Solti and his giant band in Vienna. The sound on the
Solti records was captured under basically perfect studio conditions and you can hear this
in every second of the set. 

Meanwhile as good as the Keilberth is, there is still annoying stage noise, strange
hissing, people coughing, and some inexplicably weird/amateurish sounding orchestral
playing in the quiet parts (especially the brass). So you should still get the Solti
anyway. Luckily this is easy because you just sign up for Apple Music or
[Presto](https://www.prestomusic.com/streaming) or whatever and go to it. No real
hardship.

Anyway, that's really all the new things I had to say. I still like Solti, BÃ¶hm, and that
crazy [Goodall recording in English on
Chandos](https://www.prestomusic.com/classical/products/7945388--the-goodall-ring-cycle).
You can stream all of those. Then add Keilberth for history.

In case you want to delve further, or don't believe me ...

1. Watch [this video overview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nvlibyruxdk) which says the
   same thing.

2. Read [this much more extensive
   survey](http://www.musicweb-international.com/classrev/2019/Feb/Wagner_ring_survey.pdf)
   which also says basically the same thing.

See you in ten years when they remaster the Solti _again_.


