---
title: I Forgive the Oscars
date: 2023-03-13
author: psu
---

My plan today had been to just say "Happy March 1096 2020", as we have yet again passed
one more go around the sun since that great stupidity started. But instead I have a
different and unexpected grudge to finally let go of.

In 1981, which is, I guess, 42 years ago, I was in high school and the best movie of the
year was _Raiders of the Lost Ark_.  _Raiders_ is still a pretty fun watch even today, if
you can look past the somewhat primitive visual effects and some of the problematic
cultural politics. But, the film did not get much love at the Oscars that year, because
movies that get love at the Oscars have to be solemn and serious affairs, usually
involving a lot of white people drama. So instead of an actual good time, all the awards
went to a dour and boring British film about some Olympic athletes or something.

The most insulting aspect of this was handing the _Best Original Score_ award to a
collection of dour and boring electronic pap instead of John Williams. Be honest, when was
the last time you thought about the theme to _Chariots of Fire_ without falling asleep?
Now run that trumpet fanfare from _Raiders_ through your head ... see? OK whatever.

Anyway. At the time teen high school me was _furious_, and concluded that the Oscars was a
huge scam run by money and old people. And I have never changed my mind.

But, this year I feel like I have to forgive them. About a year ago when I first saw the
trailers to [_Everything Everywhere All At
Once_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxN1T1uxQ2g) I immediately went around calling it
_The Best Film of 2022_. I did this more after actually seeing it (twice!). And
finally last night the Oscars did the right thing and picked a movie with a fun and
actually enjoyable energy over a lot of dour and depressing drama for best picture. More
importantly, they finally gave Michelle Yeoh her statue after robbing her in 2000 (!!) and
not nominating _Crouching Tiger_ for any acting awards (you can't act in Chinese, you
see). Oh, and all the other winners from the movie were great too.

So, good job Oscars. You are off the hook now. I bet you feel a great sense of relief.
