---
title: Ice Cream Sandwich
date: 2024-06-02
author: psu
---

**Note**: This is an [old page from
2006](http://www.tleaves.com/weblog/archives/000632.html) that I just remembered to copy
here. I moved it forward in time to add this note, and a note at the end.

One curious constant in the American food tradition dating back at least as far back as I
can remember is the neighborhood ice cream truck. These small white vans are similar in
shape to a mail truck, but much more festive. They play a happy song as they move down the
street, and the colorful pictures on their bodies promise an irresistible selection of
sweet confection. As far as I can tell, these trucks are the same everywhere. And, as far
as I can tell, they've sold basically the same products for the last thirty or forty
years.

Everyone has their personal favorites. I was always partial to the "strawberry shortcake"
on a stick. It has a sublime combination of vanilla ice cream, and artificially red center
with a generic sort of "berry" flavor, and a sweet crusty coating on the outside that I
guess represents "cake". The brilliance of the thing is that it's just big enough so you
get a range of interesting textures as the ice cream center melts, but it's never so big
that you lose any of the bar in liquid form.

For me, the other iconic item carried in these trucks, and convenience stores everywhere,
is the ice cream sandwich. I still get cravings for these chocolate cookies filled with a
slice of vanilla ice cream. The proper ice cream sandwich has a variety of peculiar
characteristics. Just as the bread around your barbecue can't be too good, there is no
room in the world for a "premium" ice cream sandwich. Fancy chocolate chip cookies with
nuts will not do. Thick bars of ultra-dense organic fair trade french vanilla bean ice
cream are pointless. On the other hand, the cookie does have to have a pleasing softness,
and the ice cream needs to at least reach the quality of a Breyer's or Hagan-Das vanilla. A
bit rich, creamy, not too sweet.

The Klondike version of the ice cream sandwich fails on all levels. My wife picked these
up by mistake when I sent her off to satisfy one of my cravings. They have a cookie that
is too crunchy and ice cream that is all ice and sugar, and no noticeable dairy product.
Whole foods, constantly fighting down market, has organic ice cream sandwiches that are
almost right, but not really. They get the cookie part right. Unfortunately, the ice cream
part is too dense and too sweet. It does not melt enough while you eat it, and it is too
sugary.

Happily, the food store attached to my local gas station and Starbucks plaza sells the
perfect product. The cookies are soft, but with a nice texture. The ice cream is vanilla,
but not too vanilla. Most importantly, they don't get too hard or too soft in the freezer,
so as you consume the item, the ice cream transitions from a firm, but soft texture to a
sort of half-melted on the outside and almost liquid on the inside perfection. As you take
the last bite, you think maybe you'll lose a bit of the product out the sides of the
cookie, but like the sun coming up in the morning, the ice cream gods intervene, and it
never happens.

**Note**: If 2006 me had bothered to go to the other obvious store everywhere in
Pittsburgh (Giant Eagle) he would have found the thing he was after. The Giant Eagle brand
factory-made fake-vanilla ice cream and mostly-fake chocolate cookie ice cream sandwiches
are just about perfect. They are also clearly better than the current local premium darling
brand that that puts about two times too much too fancy ice cream on too fancy cookies
that are themselves two times too thick and chewy. At least in my twisted opinion.

