---
title: Lightroom 2
date: 2009-03-09
author: psu
---

In the bad old days, I used to use <a href="./workflow-adjustments.html">three programs</a> to import, process and catalog my
growing collection of digital pictures. I didn’t really want to use all three, but I did
for two reasons. First, each program in the set did its job better than the other two.
Second, each program was barely adequate at doing its job at a reasonable level of
usability.

Photo Mechanic was good at importing and really nothing else. Photoshop was good at
processing and editing and really nothing else. And iView was OK at cataloging. I only
used it because it was better than nothing.

These days things are easier. First, computers have gotten fast enough and big enough that
a laptop of recent vintage can work with “RAW” images at full size and at full speed. No
more databases of thumbnails for me. Second, there is now a single program that can
replace the three above in almost all circumstances. Well, really there are two, but I
only use one of them: Lightroom from Adobe. If you take more than 100 digital pictures a
month or you routinely use RAW formats, you owe it to yourself to look into this
application.

If you are not familiar with Lightroom, here is what it does. Lightroom does three things:

1. Import. Lightroom lets you copy your pictures from a card or disk into whatever file
   hierarchy you choose. It then keeps track of the location and metadata for each picture
   in its catalog.

2. Edit. Lightroom has all of the picture adjustment tools that are in the Camera RAW
   module of Photoshop and lets you make non-destructive adjustments to your pictures.
   This works with either JPEG or RAW files, but you have more latitude with RAW files.

3. Catalog. Lightroom keeps a catalog of picture data and metadata and has rudimentary
   search and destroy\^H\^H\^H\^H\^H\^H\^H capabilities. This, by the way, is by far the worst part
   of the application.

In the past I would find myself still using other tools for either stage 1 or 2 of this
process. I’m not much of a cataloger. So LR does the job I need there, even if its not too
good at it. However, I used to find that Photomechanic was still faster at import and
tagging, and that I needed Photoshop for complicated local adjustments.

Well, not anymore. The import and tagging in Lightroom has improved, and performance is
not as critical now that we have 2Ghz dual core laptops with 4GB of memory.

But the big news is that Lightroom 2 now has local adjustment tools. You can have your
healing brush, local dodge and burn adjustments, gradient masks, and a lot of other toys
that you used to need adjustment layers for, but now you can do it without leaving the
Lightroom workflow.

Take this picture as an example.

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/3338046024/" title="Untitled"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/3348/3338046024_7ea2a1f04a.jpg" width="500" height="335" alt="Untitled"/></a>

It has a few huge spots because I never dust my sensor. The color saturation is too weak,
the foregorund is too light and the sky is too bright. No matter. A few passes with the
healing brush and a local burn on the sky along with the normal global adjustments for
contrast and color and you get this:

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/3338043848/in/photostream/" title="psu_20090227-00977"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/3600/3338043848_f3098ea792.jpg" width="500" height="335" alt="psu_20090227-00977"/></a>

No Photoshop needed. Lightroom 1 could do about 80% of the adjustments that I ever do to a picture. With these new tools, Lightroom 2 is probably up to 97%. If I really need a precisely shaped mask for some adjustment, I might fire up Photoshop. But more likely I’m too lazy to do the work for that picture anyway.

It’s good to only have to use one program for this. Recommended.
