---
title: Ma-Po Tofu
date: 2021-07-27
author: psu
---

I started making this a couple of years ago off of the recipe in [this youtube
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AujuLHK3hvs) by Steph and Chris of "Chinese Cooking
Demystified" fame. They also have [their recipe written out on
reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/Cooking/comments/bkwppx/recipe_sichuan_mapo_tofu_revisited_
麻婆豆腐/). The [Fucshia Dunlop
recipe](https://www.epicurious.com/recipes/member/views/ma-po-dofu-by-fuschia-dunlop-50015560)
is also a classic.

The main problem with using someone else's recipe for this dish is tuning the balance of
the spices. You want just the right amount of heat, chili flavor and Sichuan peppercorn
tingles in your tongue. Get any of these factors out of balance with the rest and the
whole thing is ruined.

So here is what I do, which gives me the spice balance I want.

1. 1/4 lb ground meat. Any kind will do, but ground chicken or turkey will be bad.

1. 1lb of soft tofu, cubed. In the recipe above they soak the tofu in hot water for a
   while. I don't do this.

1. 1 tablespoon Sichuan Chili Bean Paste, i.e. Pixian Doubanjiang (郫县豆瓣酱). Your local
   Asian store will have this. Look for a package that [looks like
   this](https://www.amazon.com/Sichuan-Pixian-Boad-Paste-Chili/dp/B01M31VHNZ/ref=sr_1_4?crid=2BYHBAGK31S1A&keywords=pixian+doubanjiang&qid=1581962243&sprefix=pixian%2Caps%2C126&sr=8-4).

1. 1 tablespoon ground chili flake. Your local store should have this too. If you want to
   splurge on something fancy [this stuff is
   great](https://themalamarket.com/collections/sichuan-spices-dry-goods/products/sichuan-chili-flakes-xiang-la-jiao-mian).

1. 2-3 teaspoons of Sichuan Peppercorn. You can use red, or you can use a mix of red and
   green. Again, your local store will have this. Again, [the stuff at the Mala market is
   great](https://themalamarket.com/collections/sichuan-spices-dry-goods/products/sichuan-flower-pepper-special-grade-da-hong-pao-sichuan-pepper).

1. 1 tablespoon fermented black beans, chopped.

1. 3 or 4 cloves of garlic, minced

1. An inch cube or so of ginger, minced.

1. 1-2 cups of chicken stock or water. It really does not matter which you use.

1. One bunch of scallion with the white part in one bowl and the green part in another bowl.

1. A bit of light soy, a bit of dark soy, Shaoxing wine if you want to get fancy.

1. Corn starch slurry (2-3 tablespoons of corn starch mixed with twice as much water).

First toast the peppercorns lightly on medium heat, and then grind them up in a mortar and
pestle (or a coffee mill that you use only for spices). Put the result in a bowl. Put the
chili flake in another bowl.

Next, chop up the black beans, put in a bowl.

Next, chop up the chili bean paste to break up the large pieces of beans, put in a bowl.

Put the rest of your aromatics in a bowl.

Put your wok on medium to medium high heat. Add oil and brown the meat, chopping it up
into little pieces. When it's pretty brown and has rendered out, turn the heat down to low
and pull the pan off the heat to cool off for 30 seconds. Add the chili bean paste. Put
the pan back on the heat and carefully warm up the chili bean paste until it lets out its
oil and aromatics. You do not want to burn it. This will take a minute or two. Mix the red
oil into the meat.

Now add your ginger and garlic and the white part of the scallion, chili flake, and black
beans. Mix it around. Add about half of the ground sichuan peppercorn at this point.

Add a cup or so of water, then the tofu, then add the soy and the wine and more water
until you get a good balance of liquid to tofu depending on how saucy you want the final
result. Mix this around to make sure the balance is right. I like to be able to see the
top half of the tofu cubes sticking out of the water. You will get a feel for this.

Finally, add a third of the corn starch. Stir it around to how much the sauce thickens. If
it's still soupy, add a bit more, stir it around. Repeat until you get the consistency you
want. Again, you'll get a feel for this.

Here's what my final result looks like in the pot at the end:

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/51340144248/in/dateposted-public/" title="IMG_5204"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/51340144248_2ef58d1fca.jpg" height="500" alt="IMG_5204"></a>

And in a bowl

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/51339926851/in/dateposted-public/" title="IMG_5207"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/51339926851_5d47440242.jpg" height="375" alt="IMG_5207"></a>

And in a bowl with rice

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/51340929715/in/dateposted-public/" title="IMG_5213"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/51340929715_9da474361f.jpg" height="375" alt="IMG_5213"></a>


To finish up taste a spoonful
to check the balance of heat to numbing flavor. Add a pinch or two more of the sichuan
peppercorn if you want more of that kick. Or a pinch or two more chili flake if you want
more heat.

Finally, put the green part of the scallion on top for garnish.

Serve over white rice. Nothing else. If I catch you eating this with some brown
rice/quinoa medley shit I'll come for you.

If for some reason you want to make vegan friends you can use dried shitake mushrooms that
you soak and then chop up instead of the ground beef. They will never know what hit them.
To unmake the new friends you can then tell them you actually put beef in it after
they eat the whole pot.

Finally, you will notice that my recipe, the Dunlop recipe, and the Steph and Chris recipe
vary a lot in how much of the spicy stuff they use. I'm not sure why this is, but my
amounts have ended up working best for me over time. Again, after you do this a few times
you'll get a feel for what you like. Luckily the end to end cooking time on this dish is
only about 15-20min. So you can experiment very quickly. Have fun.
