---
title: Pan Gas (锅气)
date: 2021-10-08
author: psu
---

Long time readers will be familiar with my general annoyance at a lot of Western writing
about how to cook Chinese food. With relatively few exceptions I tend to think that people
make this food out to be more complicated than it really is. I also tend to think that
people, even Chinese, or Chinese-American people tend to attribute an almost mystical
aspect to the technique needed to cook good Chinese food in a home kitchen.

Nothing sums up both of these annoyances as well as the almost ubiquitous obsession with
_wok hei_ (Cantonese) or _guo qi_ (Mandarin) which literally translates as "pan gas" but
which has been more poetically rendered as "wok breath" or "breath of the wok" in the
West. The idea is that when you cook food in a really hot wok, over a really high flame,
the resulting food will have a particular smokey/grilled/singed flavor profile generated
by the heat and the flame acting on the oil in the pan.  This is especially strong when the
food is straight out of the pan and on to a plate in your favorite Chinese takeout joint.

This is all fine. I have no doubt that the food tastes this way, and that some combination
of the pan and the technique of the chef makes it taste this way. While before you would
have just had to take some writer's word for it, these days you can just go to youtube and
[watch Chef Wang set his food on fire over that jet engine wok
burner](https://youtu.be/RY-KAQQB4ik?t=90) and you know what's up. His commentary will
even explicitly mention getting the "锅气" out of the food. More recently his English
subtitles have started translating this as "wok hei", since whoever is writing them knows
that's a phrase people know. But earlier videos that are more automatically subtitled say
"pan gas", which amuses me.

So what is my problem? My problem is that people (or at least cookbook publishers) seem to
think that achieving this flavor profile is the be all and end all of cooking Chinese Food
at home. Find almost any Western, and especially English language writing on Chinese
cooking and some mention of this technique will show up early and often.

This attitude always confused me, and I have come to realize (from Kenji's comments [at
the end of in this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6JE7W8Z6Hs)) that this might be
because I grew up eating Chinese food at home (cooked on an electric stove), rather than
Chinese food in restaurants (and the stuff at home was always better). But, most of the
food writing that annoys me is from people chasing _restaurant style_ Chinese food and
trying to figure out how to do _that_ at home.

Now, I don't want to begrudge people their irrational obsessions. God knows this web site
is nothing if not a catalog of mine. But there is _so much more_ to Chinese food than just
stir fry technique.

Chinese cooking encompasses every possible technique in the kitchen. There is stir fry
(which is really just saute, don't @ me), roasting, braising, deep frying, smoking, bread
making, pancakes, dumplings ([the best
dumplings](http://mutable-states.com/the-illustrated-pot-sticker.html)), noodles, soups,
hot pot, pickles, and anything else you can think of. Yet over and over again people just
go on and on about stir fry. Scroll around in Chef Wang's videos, see how many of them
involve setting the wok on fire. The number is actually pretty small. If you go to many of
the other huge number of Chinese language cooking channels on youtube you see the same
thing, [even when the cooks used to work in
restaurants](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCBJmYv3Vf_tKcQr5_qmayXg). 

I guess it's no coincidence that almost none of my favorite Chinese food is restaurant
style high heat stir fry. Steamed fish is steamed. Congee is over-boiled rice. Dumplings
are boiled or steamed. Ma-po tofu is a medium to low heat stew. Three cup chicken is
almost stir fried, but it's really a braise. Good hot pan technique is probably most
critical with the green vegetables ... but to me getting that right is not that different
from getting the same thing right at a saute station in France.

I should also note that even the book that I usually credit with starting the whole _wok
hei_ obsession, Grace Young's _The Breath of the Wok_, covers the many other aspects of
Chinese food that I have mentioned, though that coverage is later in the book after all of
the semi-mystical Wok material. So really this whole thing just circles back to _my_
irrational obsession with my own probably unfair perceptions. Still, by far the most
extensive recent piece about Chinese food in the newspaper of record is [Kenji's bit about
wok hei at home](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/04/dining/stir-fry-recipe-wok-hei.html),
so maybe not.

In either case, I am here to say my peace about _wok hei_ and then shut up, and my peace
has two parts:

1. Just stop it. Go learn to make other things. It's just not that important. You can make
   Chinese food on any stove you have and almost any pan you have. Stop overthinking it.

2. I take no credit for thought number 1, except that it lived in my annoyed brain for
   years. All the credit for expressing the thought goes to the heroes at [Chinese Cooking
   Demystified](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6JE7W8Z6Hs) for making all that [great
   food on a little hot plate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=imiTVVKBWdY) and sharing my
   confusion over the _wok hei_ obsession. Take [their advice about wok
   technique](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WujehK7kYLM) and listen to [their truth
   about what you need in a wok](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=alZ8alIlhAU).

Now I'm going to go back to my kitchen, and my favorite [12 inch non-stick aluminum wok
shaped pan](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00MGFZVII/), and make dinner. This pan, by
the way, is great for _everything_. It's not too small. It's not too big and heavy. The
coating can take a beating and it still works fine. And the flat bottom lets it double as
a small frying pan for things like French omelettes and frying hot dogs. I keep a 14 inch
steel wok around for deep frying but it's just too big and unwieldy for day to day, and
because I don't use it enough the surface is never any good. Maybe I'll try to find a nice
iron one to set on fire over the grill.
