---
title: Plus 2024
date: 2024-12-31
author: psu
---

Long time readers of this site and other people who know me know that I have a generally
well earned reputation for having an overly negative world view. In my defense a lot of
the world is really stupid.

A lot that happened in 2024 served to reinforce my default point of view. Our politics
again put forth a choice between an geriatric orange asshole convicted of multiple crimes
or a last minute replacement for geriatric placeholder who while at least still mobile
still mostly represented views that were already stale 30 years ago and mostly represent
the interests of the same population of people who thought the geriatric placeholder was a
good idea.

Meanwhile, the big idea in industrial software these days is stealing everyone else's
content to "train" a giant statistical language model to give you answers that are wrong
at least half the time and then waste an arbitrary level of resources jamming these idiot
bots into all of our favorite software applications so that they can do things no one
asked for at a level of correctness that no one used to call acceptable. All this instead
of spending time making new software that is actually useful for solving actual problems
in a, you know, deterministic way instead of a probabilistic one. Maybe it's time for me
to get off the train.

But, enough of that. Instead of dwelling on the bullshit I will now endeavour for you to
spend the rest of your time on this web site in 2024 reading about things I actually
liked. That might be harder to do, but it will be more fun in the end. In the end the best
way to maintain a more positive disposition is to just say "fuck it" and ignore the
dipshits and the assholes. So here we go.

#### Forno Brenci

Forno Brenci sells baked goods at the Bloomfield farmer's market in the spring, summer and
fall. I somehow spaced out and left them off my recent [food
list](10-things-to-eat-in-pittsburgh-before-you-are-dead-2024.html), so I'm fixing that
now. His flat breads, focaccia, pizza and sandwiches are great. But his sweet stuff is
great too. The gluten free chocolate chip banana bread is standout. And, this year he
started selling a thing called a "Ciavattoni" filled with sweet cheese and chocolate that
is to die for. It's also much the same pastry as a thing we in Pittsburgh had only known
as a "mele" from the original Piccolo Forno and now Colangelo's's Bakery in the strip. Go
get it.

#### New Carnegie Music Hall

They renovated the inside of the Carnegie music hall. The seats are a lot bigger and more
comfortable now. This will make the live shows there a lot nicer.

#### New Asian Food Things

The gradual entanglement of all things Asian food into the fabric of the Pittsburgh food
scene continued apace in 2024 and _I am here for it_. We have a new Asian themed food
hall, three or four new spots in Squirrel Hill, a much larger rebuild of the _Many More_
food store in the strip and the continued ascension of _Pusadee's Garden_ as at least one
of the top two or three destination fine dining spots in town. A less visible, but even
more pleasing effect of all of this has been the gradual appearance of really high quality
East Asian produce at the local farmer's markets. Scallions that are the right size,
multiple varieties of actually baby sized baby bok choy, those great long skinny
eggplants. What is not to love.

#### Eclipse and other Sky Things

The [eclipse](eclipse-2024.html) was great. The [auroras](photo-realistic.html) were great
too.

CMU Concerts

Fat Butcher

The Best Potato Chips I ever Had

Wagnerism

Smaller Cameras

Physical Media
