---
title: The Rice is Important
date: 2023-04-22
author: psu
---

In Pittsburgh _Chicken Latino_ is a long time favorite Peruvian style roast chicken joint
that also serves a variety of other kinds of things, all in portions that are too large.

_Chicken Latino_ is also, paradoxically, the home of the cheeseburger in Pittsburgh which
is probably second on my list by overall objective "quality" but first on my list of
emotional favorites. In these times when people can be remarkably pretentious and
self-centered about getting burgers and fries made from only ingredients of the highest
quality and correct origins, _Chicken Latino_ takes frozen patties and "steak fries" that
just fell off the Sysco truck and turns them into a burger and fries better than almost
any other in town. The fries are the most puzzling part of this equation. They really
should not be good, but they really are better than almost any other fries in this city
where almost no one seems to know how to make fries.

Anyway, Latino has been open for about 15 years, but it wasn't until about five years ago
(I think) that they started serving a dream dish for anyone who loves Chinese food,
Peruvian food, double starch, and Chinese/Peruvian/Pittsburgh fries fusion cuisine. I
refer, of course, to _Lomo Saltado_ which is basically a sort of beef stir fry served on
top of yellow rice and french fries. Brilliant.

Here is what it looks like:

> <a data-flickr-embed="true" href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/79904144@N00/50071740991/in/photostream" title="IMG_0017"><img src="https://live.staticflickr.com/65535/50071740991_4a4d0b1884.jpg" width="500" height="375" alt="IMG_0017"></a>

Who can't love this?

If I'm honest, the beef stir fry part of this dish is its weakest aspect by far ... but
the fries, and most importantly, the rice mostly make up for it.

Anyway, I bring this dish up because at some point last year I was excited to finally sit
down in a new place in town that a lot of local foodies appear to like that had an upscale
version of this dish on their menu. So of course I ordered it. 

Here, the meat was a lot better than the cheaper cut you get at Latino, but overall the
dish was bad. The dish was bad for two reasons:

1. Bad rice.

1. Bad fries.

I will not rant here about the bad fries. Bad fries are just a fact of American life, I
think. Whereas in (say) France there are places whose <a
href="https://www.relaisentrecote.fr/?page_id=205&lang=en_GB">entire existence is
dedicated to serving nothing but steak with _perfect_ french fries</a>, even fancy places
run by fancy chefs in the U.S. will serve you sub-par french fries on a routine basis.
This is kind of unforgivable, but I guess fries are also technically a tiny bit demanding
to do well on a large scale. But really it's still unforgivable.

What I _will_ rant about is the rice. It tasted like day old rice that you have left
partially uncovered in the fridge and then reheated in the microwave for about 30 seconds
while forgetting to add a small dribble of water. You bite into it and the kernels break
off in your mouth in a mealy semi-crunchy and tasteless mess. But, you are either too
lazy, too tired, too hungover, or too hungry to fix it now, and just dump your food on top
hoping the sauce from the food will finish the job of bringing the rice back to life. But
it does not.

All this for $29 a plate.

This is, of course, not the first time I have gotten unforgivably bad rice in a
restaurant. I sent the rice _back_ at a fancy French place in Paris once, and they sent me
back a perfectly great risotto, which for some reason they could make better than plain
white rice. I also got the single worst bowl of white rice that I ever paid money for in
my life at a fancy special dinner at a long standing and well loved local Asian fusion
joint (it was Soba) in Pittsburgh. That rice was like the fridge rice above, except they
hadn't even really tried to reheat it, I think. This happened a long time ago, and people
say I should be over it by now. But I'm not.

I am here to say that it does not have to be this way. Unlike fries, _rice_ is completely
trivial to cook well. Here is what you do:

1. Buy a fucking rice cooker.
1. Cook perfect rice every single time.

The cooker will even keep the perfect rice _warm_ and perfect for the entire restaurant
service. I doubt that there is any single food product that requires fewer brain cells to
do well than perfect white rice in a rice cooker. And yet the evidence before us is that
people care so little about rice that they won't even do the bare minimum amount of work
needed to make it decent.

At this point in the article at least 15 reply-boys (and girls) will stand up and declare
that no functioning human being should need a _dedicated kitchen appliance_ taking up
their precious counter space for the sole purpose of making sure that the rice is good
every time. I am here to say that these people are wrong, because their framing of the
question is wrong. The question is not "can I cook OK rice on the stove (or more recently,
in the microwave)?". The question is: "can I push a single button and get perfect rice of
any kind any time I want without looking at the cooker again until it's done?" ... and
then also keep it warm and perfect for between 8 and 24 hours afterwards.

The second thing is what rice cookers do, and if rice is important enough to you that it
will be the main starch in more than 15 out of 35 meals every week, then you will do the
right thing and just buy the machine.

But, this attitude about rice is rare here which is why rice always sucks in the U.S. In
the U.S. (and most of Europe, really) rice is at best a second tier auxiliary starch that
is only used once in a while. In baseball terms, it's not "an every day player". So no one
actually cares if it's good or not.

Let us contrast this situation with Japan (and most other places in Asia). In Japan you
can walk into _any_ 7-11 store _anywhere_ in the country and walk over to a cooler with
_pre-made_ sushi things in it and you will get better rice, even though it's cold, than
what is served in about 99% of all places that serve rice in the West. In particular the
rice wrapped in sweet tofu skin is _always great_, from the middle of Tokyo to any random
small town with a train station 7-11 no matter how few people live there. This is because
they have a rice cooker and they give a shit.

I have often joked that one of my food dreams would be for a single Japanese 7-11 to open
within a reasonable driving distance from my home. Not only would this greatly improve
upon the quality of snack foods available in the area, it would also instantly become the
best sushi restaurant in town and the best cheap East Asian fast food in town. But really
this dream is more about just having a place somewhere that cares about the rice as much
as you are supposed to. 

The rice is important. In sushi, it's as important as the fish (remember: sushi means
rice). In Chinese food it's as important as all the other dishes on the table, because all
of them are improved when put on top of rice. Rice should not be an overlooked side dish
that is little more than some extra food cost. We need for it to be elevated to the same
level as potatoes, pasta, the fancy sourdough bread, and all those other hideous whole
grain products that unlike rice don't really taste that good. It should be a whole menu
unto itself.

The rice is important.

#### Appendix: Places in Pittsburgh with Good Rice

- Chicken Latino.

- Rose Tea in Oakland.

- Cafe 33 in Squirrel Hill.

- Chengdu Gourmet/Chengdu 2 (could be better, but not bad).

- Mola. Decent sushi rice. Maybe as good as Chaya was, which was the standard
  back in the day.

- Penn Avenue Fish Company. Their rice is good enough for the rice bowls and stuff but the
  sushi rice is sub par.

- Salems

- Turkish Kebab House.

- Most of the Indian restaurants, although Indian rice is a different aesthetic than East
  Asian rice (it's not sticky, what the hell?).