---
title: Time Marches On
date: 2024-01-17
author: psu
---

I first set up a web site that you could call a "blog", or "weblog" as I liked to say back
then, in Jan of 2004. It's [here](https://kvdpsu.org/blog/B1578553917/index.html).

The first post there is dated Jan 18, 2004, but it's just a link to another thing I had
put on my personal web site in November 2003. That piece was an [article about digital
cameras](https://kvdpsu.org/digital.html) and is recognizably in the overall style that
I'd end up adopting for all of my bloggy stuff. I hesitate to use as pretentious and
self-important a term as "style" or "voice" for the rudimentary writing that I do here.
"Persona" might be more accurate although over the years even that bitter little man has
toned down a bit (I hope).

Anyway, if I had been paying more attention I'd have done the "Hey I've been posting dumb
things on the Internet for 20 years" post in November of last year instead of January of
this one. But I must have been busy with something else that day, so page post will be the
20 year marker instead.

The "Mixed Logs" site lasted about five months, after which I noticed that my buddy Pete
had started his own site and then we jointly decided to merge the two places into one.
About half the stuff I have written since 2004 started out on
[tleaves](http://tleaves.com), which has had various homes and is now mostly dormant, but
still a point of reference. I copied a lot of my favorite stuff from there to here, but
not all of it. Mostly I have let the shorter fill pieces and the more pointless
ruminations about video games stay over there. Of course there are a [few notable
exceptions](./dark-souls-ate-my-brain.html) to the video game rule, but overall I am not
as personally connected to that material as I used to be, so I can't tell if _I_ just
think it's pointless or if it's actually really pointless. Either way it's fine where it
is.

Of course I moved my new stuff off of tleaves and to this site just over 10 years ago.
[The marker](introduction.html) for that change started out as a fairly recent divider
between all of my old stuff and the trickle of new stuff. Now it sits almost exactly
halfway between the two piles, which is wild.

The new pile has more ruminations about [music](a-beginners-guide-to-the-pso.html),
[software and progamming](general-dynamics.html), [mathematics](yoneda-speedrun.html),
[physics](reading-physics.html), and some [weird mashups](code-souls.html) of [everything at
once](the-software-quantum-zeno-effect.html).

I think, but I'm not sure, because I don't collect the data, that I've been going at a
higher pace in 2020 than I had been in the few years before. I guess I've had more on my
mind since the great stupidity.

This stuff has now been around long enough to _maybe_ worry about what to do with it when
stop paying the hosting fees for the web site. On the other hand everything is backed up
on my personal computing devices, and in github. So who knows.
