---
title: Two Thirds
date: 2024-05-19
author: psu
---

When the PSO announced their 2023-24 season last spring around this time one show caught
my eye immediately. The promise was that in April of this year they would be playing the
Bruckner 8th symphony. This got me very excited because my most irrational obsession in
Classical Music is sitting in the dark and being as quiet as possible for a single piece
of music that lasts more than an hour and is structured mostly around two giant slow
movements.

For this kind of experience Bruckner and Mahler are the two big players. And interestingly
aside from the fact that they both wrote ludicrously verbose and expansive music the two
composers could not be more different in style and temperament.

Anyway, with this knowledge in hand, and with my [ear
pods](https://mutable-states.com/sept-shorts.html) in my ear holes for long morning walks,
I decided to spend my winter working my way through all the Bruckner symphonies so I'd
have all the context that I needed to really absorb what the PSO was going to show me.

This was great fun, and by around February I had actually worked my way through all the
symphonies up to the eighth. Then, _BETRAYAL_. Just about this time I found out that the PSO
had replaced the Bruckner show with a performance of the Beethoven 9. I love the Beethoven
9 as much as the next guy (although I _personally_ think Honeck's way with it is a bit
weird ... too fast) but I was sad to see the Bruckner go. I suppose they did this for the
200th anniversary, but probably also for the ticket sales. Bruckner does not sell.

But, since I did all that work, today I'm going to spend some time talking about the
Bruckner 3rd. I will provide no deep musicological insight, just my usual shallow analysis
and personal anecdote. While I'm at it I'm also going to talk about the Mahler 3rd because
after going through all the Bruckner, there is only one place to go after that, and that
place is Mahler. They kind of fit together, even though, as I said above, they are
completely different.

The other interesting thing about Bruckner and Mahler is how many recordings of their
works there are. There are entire web sites dedicated to doing nothing but keep track of a
complete list of every recording that has ever been made. For example, here is a fairly
complete list of [all the recordings of the Bruckner
3rd](https://www.abruckner.com/discography1/symphonyno3indmino/). I think I counted them
once and there are around 250 listed on that page. It's hard to tell because many of the
records have been issued multiple times. That is an incredible number of recordings for a
piece that can't sell even a fourth the seats of the Beethoven 9 when performed live.

That said, Bruckner 3 is a bit of an outlier here because Bruckner was famous for not
leaving his work alone. It's rare that there is only one version of any given symphony and
for the third there are at least two or three that are regularly performed plus one or two
more that are on the fringes. The top of that page sums it up:

> The Symphony No. 3 exists in several versions. The first version of the score was
completed in 1873 and was published in an edition by Leopold Nowak. William Carragan also
prepared a performing variant of 1874. In 1876, Bruckner composed a "Second Adagio" which
was published by the Bruckner Edition. The full score was revised again in 1877 - that
version was prepared by Nowak and includes a coda to the Scherzo. This version was
published earlier by Fritz Oeser, but his version shows the symphony as it existed in 1878
when Bruckner had removed the Scherzo coda. The symphony was revised again by Bruckner in
1889. Haas' edition was never published since the printing plates were lost in the War.
Leopold Nowak's edition is the one used for this version. The first published edition was
prepared in 1890 by Theodore Raettig. It most closely follows Nowak's 1889 edition.

[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symphony_No._3_(Bruckner)) also has a lot of this
history for you. 

For my survey I played mostly recordings of the 1877 or 1889 version. But I also had on
hand one of the 1873, which I went through for reference. My main list of recordings to
try comes from [American Record Guide](https://www.americanrecordguide.com). Their
Bruckner overview is fairly authoritative. You can buy a PDF of the March/April 2022 issue
where it appears. The editor of this magazine is sort of a nut though.

In any case, this is the list of records that I played through. Well, at least the ones I
wrote down: Karl BÃ¶hm (1889) on Decca, the Bernard Haitink (1877) on Philips, Eugene
Jochum (1889) on EMI, Simone Young (1873 version) on Oehms, Stanislaw Skrowaczewski (1889)
on Oehms and Daniel Barenboim (1878) on Teldec. I actually own most of these recordings,
but through the miracle of online <s>piracy laundering sites</s> streaming services you
can probably listen to most of them with just a small subscription fee, or on youtube.

As is fairly usual for Bruckner, this piece is based around two long and relatively slow
movements (first and second). A shorter Scherzo ("dance"), and then a medium length and
tempo final movement. Also as usual for his mature style, there are a lot of soaring
horns, somewhat meandering form, a general sense of spiritual awe, and also unique to this
piece, a lot of quotes of Wagner. The piece was dedicated to Wagner, and sometimes carries
the "Wagner Symphony" subheading. As you get into the later versions the Wagner quotations
are less and less obvious.

Overall I thought the 1873 version holds up OK, but is clearly not tightened up as much as
one might like. The 1877 and 1889 are both nice. I happened to really enjoy the Haitink
performance, and that's more important than what particular version of the piece he is
playing.

So on to Mahler. I started playing the Mahler symphonies because I was going to go see a
performance of the 4th, and I wanted to get in the mood. But I didn't feel like I needed
to start at the start, I had heard the 1st and 2nd a lot. So I started with the third.
Like the Bruckner third the Mahler third is long and meandering and apparently concerned
with _big_ questions and _big_ orchestral set pieces. But that's where the similarities
end.

Where the Bruckner invokes a sort of abstract universal spirituality, Mahler is more
obviously and concretely about our Earthly existence. There are animals, children,
marching bands, and all that. The music is crazy and neurotic, it seems to have no form or
flow, and the instruments make strange noises that seem impossible. I found the it hard to
understand until I had gone gone through it a few times and then suddenly I finally _got
it_. It's great fun, if you can use that word to describe a single piece of music that
lasts more than an hour and a half. Someone should make it into a movie.

Some records for you to try: Bernstein with the NY Phil on Sony. Honeck with the PSO (you
have to buy this, but it's worth it), Haitink on Philips (there is is again). You can get
more suggestions from American Record Guide (July/August 2012) and from this youtube
video: <a
href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ft_VyD7TU08">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ft_VyD7TU08</a>

**Fake Final Note**: In the video, Mr. Hurwitz calls out the Horenstein recording on
Unicorn as one to avoid. He is pretty vociferous and a bit mean about it. While I don't
think I'd go quite as hard as he does, I will say that I tried to play through that record
a few times and just _did not get it_. So I switched to the Bernstein and Haitink above
and was a lot happier. Your milage may vary. Luckily these things are all easy to try out,
because as I said above: online <s>piracy laundering sites</s> streaming services.

**Actual Final Note**: The Hurwitz video also calls the PSO horn section "the best brass
section in the history of the universe". Having gone to the PSO for the last thirty years
or so who am I to disagree.

