---
title: Why (Premier League) Football is Better Than Your Favorite Sport
date: 2023-06-02
author: psu
---

Some time ago I wrote a somewhat tongue in cheek bit about why [football in the NFL is the
best sport to
watch](https://mutable-states.com/why-football-is-better-than-your-favorite-sport.html). I
still stand by _some_ of it, but the NFL has had its problems over the last almost 15
years and for various [other
reasons](https://www.bbc.com/sport/american-football/55975394) I have also had less of a
personal interest in the game lately.

The opening of that piece goes has this quip in it:

>  If your favorite sport is soccer than we can just agree now that you will hate me and I
>  will feel sorry for you.

Which, well, I guess brings us to the subject at hand. As we wind down to the end of
English and European football seasons, let us reflect on how in the fullness of time one
can change one's mind about things, and discuss what is great about soccer.

As before this is mostly sort of serious, but not really. And as before only some of the
reasons for liking the other football now have anything to do with the game itself.

#### No Night Games

I mentioned this in my [previous short thought about English
football](https://mutable-states.com/a-forced-break.html). The timing of the games on this
side of the Atlantic is just great. You can enjoy a few nice games every weekend morning,
and then go about the rest of your day without sports getting in the way. Even during the
NFL football season, you can easily watch both the Premier League and Red Zone on Sundays.
And since they are of a fixed length, you always know that all the Premier League games
will be over by "the witching hour" on Red Zone. The perfect crime.

But the very best thing is that you never have to be up near midnight watching some stupid
sports game because of unavoidable psychological programming that you picked up in your
childhood. This is even better the consuming American sports on the American west coast.

#### Commentary

While I'm sure some of this is just the relative novelty of my experience, I feel like the
commentary on Premier League football games is in general much better than the current
crop of announcers in the NFL, NBA, and national MLB. The NBA in particular is in a
horrible drought right now, with everyone waiting and praying for Mark Jackson and Jeff
Van Gundy to just fucking get out of the way so at least Doris Burke can keep Mike Bree
company on the big games. But this will never happen.

The NFL commentary is on the whole better than the NBA, but also generally anonymous and
without style. Certainly nowhere in American sports will you get the literary turns
of phrase that happen half a dozen times in every game where [Peter Drury is doing the
call](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aSVUJXomnFo). Every game he does generates at least
one or two twitter clips from the Men In Blazers. No American announcer even comes close.

The soccer analysts are also mostly better than NFL and NBA. Not only do they all seem
able to provide you with early Tony Romo levels of insight into the what's going on in the
game, they also have no fear when it comes to criticizing the players, coaches, and refs
doing the playing, coaching, and reffing. No missed strike is a good try, it's always "he
should have done better". Questionable tactical changes are called out. Dives are called
dives and dodgy decisions by the ref in the penalty box are given no mercy. Very
refreshing.

#### No Tanking

Another structural difference that makes the Premier League, and really _all_ of the
international soccer leagues more emotionally compelling is that because of _relegation_
teams cannot tank. Let us review.

In American sports, because we are a communist society, when you do _badly_ and come in
_last_ the league tries to help ou out by giving you the best shot at new young players to
make your team good again. No one would actually publicly condone losing on purpose to get
good draft picks, but at least in the NBA there is a verb (tanking) that means basically
"lose as on purpose as you can to get good picks". In addition, there was even a team (the
Philadelphia 76ers) that engaged in what they called "the process", which involved tanking
over _multiple_ seasons to get many good draft picks to become more competitive. They did
this for about five years and obtained a generational player (Joel Embiid) that has led
them to several thrilling exits in the early rounds of the playoffs. So there is that.

NFL teams can't really explicitly tank, but under good management bad teams can get good
if they understand how to use the draft system to their advantage.

International football teams cannot do this _at all_. If you lose you don't get second
chances. You get kicked out of the league into a lower tier league where you get even less
money and fewer resources which makes it even harder for you to win. This system is called
_relegation_. Typically the bottom three teams in the league get kicked out and replaced
by the top three teams in the tier below. In English soccer there are 6 or 7 levels of
professional and semi-professional leagues ... so the potential for collapse is almost
infinite.

This is a brutal and Darwinian way to run a sports league, and it's also genius for two
reasons:

- Now there is a super compelling reason to watch the bad teams as well as the good teams.

- Watching the promotion fights for the lower tier leagues is just as fun as watching the
  championship fights for the top tier.

This year we didn't find out which teams got dropped from the Premier League until the
nearly the very end of the very last day of the season. As a neutral fan can't beat this
for entertainment. As an actual fan it must be the absolute worst.

#### Drama

Again, I think some of this feeling is just the relative novelty of my experience, but I
feel like the drama in the Premier League is unmatched. Certainly this year was crazy in
ways I have never seen in other sports. Every game seemed to stakes. More teams fired
their head coaches than did not fire their coaches. _Several_ teams fired their managers
_several_ times. It was unreal.

And then on top of all of this was the relegation drama, the drama of the evil empire of
Man City just inevitably chasing down Arsenal and crushing them and everyone else to win
the league.

And _then_ on top of all _that_ is Peter Drury and his buttery delivery making even a
throwaway game between Man City and a bottom feeder into the thing that you _must_ watch
this morning even though you know you don't need to watch it.

I wonder if next year will be like this?

#### The Game and the Meta-Game



#### Gripes

- offside

- hand ball in the box

- what time is it anyway?

- the zombie 95th minute

https://bookshop.org/p/books/the-club-how-the-english-premier-league-became-the-wildest-richest-most-disruptive-force-in-sports-joshua-robinson/16600725?ean=9780358213055
